docs: add hands-on guide for Topology Aware Scheduling setup (#13079)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: site/content/en/docs/tasks/manage/setup_topology_aware_scheduling.md

carry topology labels.

The intended audience for this page are [batch administrators](/docs/tasks#batch-administrator).
If you are a batch user looking to run workloads on an already configured
cluster, see [Run Workloads with Topology-Aware Scheduling](/docs/tasks/run/topology_aware_scheduling/).

## Before you begin

Make sure the following conditions are met:

- The kubectl command-line tool is installed.
- [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) is installed.
- The `TopologyAwareScheduling` feature gate is enabled (beta, on by default).

## Step 1: A cluster with topology labels

TAS relies on node labels that describe the placement of each node in the
physical hierarchy of your data center, for example its block, rack, and
hostname. On cloud providers these labels are typically set by the provider
(see [Ecosystem Resources](/docs/ecosystem/) for the label names); on-prem
you have to label the nodes yourself.

For this guide, create a Kind cluster with 8 worker "nodes" spread over 2
blocks and 4 racks, simulated with labels:

{{< include "examples/tas/kind-cluster.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kind create cluster --config kind-cluster.yaml

> ```

Author: the config is downloadable already - there's a button at the top of the snippet

Then [install Kueue](/docs/installation).

Verify the topology labels on the nodes:

```bash
kubectl get nodes -L cloud.provider.com/topology-block,cloud.provider.com/topology-rack
```

## Step 2: Create the Topology, ResourceFlavor and queues

The `Topology` object defines the hierarchy of the labels, from the widest
(block) to the narrowest (hostname). The `ResourceFlavor` references it via
`topologyName`, and selects the TAS nodes via `nodeLabels`:

{{< include "examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml
```

## Step 3: Run a workload with a topology constraint

Submit a Job that requests all its Pods to run within a single rack, using
the `kueue.x-k8s.io/podset-required-topology` annotation on the Pod template:

{{< include "examples/tas/sample-job-required.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kubectl create -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/tas/sample-job-required.yaml
```

## Step 4: Observe the placement decision

Kueue records the chosen topology domains in the Workload's admission status.
Inspect it:

```bash
kubectl get workloads
WORKLOAD=$(kubectl get workloads -o name | head -1)

> kubectl get $WORKLOAD -o jsonpath='{.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].topologyAssignment}' | jq

Author: added jq to the list of requirements

> kubectl get $WORKLOAD -o jsonpath='{.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].topologyAssignment}' | jq

Author: I separated $WORKLOAD from $PENDING_WORKLOAD for clarity

## Step 1: A cluster with topology labels

TAS relies on node labels that describe the placement of each node in the
physical hierarchy of your data center, for example its block, rack, and
hostname. On cloud providers these labels are typically set by the provider
(see [Ecosystem Resources](/docs/ecosystem/) for the label names); on-prem
you have to label the nodes yourself.

For this guide, create a Kind cluster with 8 worker "nodes" spread over 2
blocks and 4 racks, simulated with labels:

{{< include "examples/tas/kind-cluster.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kind create cluster --config kind-cluster.yaml
```

Then [install Kueue](/docs/installation).

Verify the topology labels on the nodes:

```bash
kubectl get nodes -L cloud.provider.com/topology-block,cloud.provider.com/topology-rack
```

## Step 2: Create the Topology, ResourceFlavor and queues

The `Topology` object defines the hierarchy of the labels, from the widest
(block) to the narrowest (hostname). The `ResourceFlavor` references it via
`topologyName`, and selects the TAS nodes via `nodeLabels`:

{{< include "examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash

> kubectl apply -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml

Reviewer: Looking at this file:
```
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 100
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 100Gi
```

it seems way too big for a local kind setup.

Author: I've reduced the values a bit, but they still remain higher than the cluster capacity to prove that the TAS offers additional admission control mechanisms (see: step 5b)

```

## Step 3: Run a workload with a topology constraint

Submit a Job that requests all its Pods to run within a single rack, using
the `kueue.x-k8s.io/podset-required-topology` annotation on the Pod template:

{{< include "examples/tas/sample-job-required.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kubectl create -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/tas/sample-job-required.yaml
```

## Step 4: Observe the placement decision

Kueue records the chosen topology domains in the Workload's admission status.
Inspect it:

```bash
kubectl get workloads
WORKLOAD=$(kubectl get workload -o name --sort-by='.metadata.creationTimestamp' | tail -n 1)
kubectl get $WORKLOAD -o jsonpath='{.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].topologyAssignment}' | jq
```

The output enumerates the exact nodes assigned to the Pods, with a Pod count
per node, for example:

```json
{
  "levels": [
    "kubernetes.io/hostname"
  ],
  "slices": [
    {
      "domainCount": 2,
      "podCounts": {
        "individual": [
          7,
          3
        ]
      },
      "valuesPerLevel": [
        {
          "individual": {
            "prefix": "kind-worker",

>             "roots": [

Reviewer: Maybe point to documentation or explain here what roots is. Its not super intuitive that its meant to indicate:
`[kind-worker, kind-worker2]`

Author: I've added a dedicated explanation

## Step 5: Experiment with the constraint types

To build intuition, try the other annotation variants and observe how the
assignments change:

- `kueue.x-k8s.io/podset-preferred-topology`: the rack is only a preference;
  if no single rack fits the workload, Kueue tries wider levels (block), and
  finally distributes the workload across multiple topology domains.
- `kueue.x-k8s.io/podset-unconstrained-topology`: the Pods can land anywhere,
  but Kueue still tracks node capacity and only admits the workload when all
  Pods fit.

For example, submit another Job that requires a single rack but exceeds a rack's
capacity, and observe that it stays `Pending`, with the reason visible in the
Workload conditions:

```bash
PENDING_WORKLOAD=$(kubectl get workload -o name --sort-by='.metadata.creationTimestamp' | tail -n 1)
kubectl get $PENDING_WORKLOAD -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="QuotaReserved")].message}'
```

An output similar to `couldn't assign flavors to pod set main: topology "default" allows to fit only 4 out of 10 pod(s).`
It indicates that the topology constraint, not the quota, is what blocks the
admission.

## Cleanup

```bash
kind delete cluster
```

> ## What's next

Reviewer: Do we also want to add pointers to other TAS related flags? ex: node hotswap + a bunch of other ones.

Author: II've included the What's next section and reviewed the remaining two articles (/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling/ and /docs/tasks/run/topology_aware_scheduling/) to make sure they're cross-referenced and avoid duplicates

---
title: "Setup Topology Aware Scheduling"
date: 2026-07-03
weight: 6
description: >
  A hands-on guide to configuring Topology Aware Scheduling and observing how it places workloads.
---

This page shows how to set up
[Topology Aware Scheduling (TAS)](/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling) as
a cluster administrator, and how to observe the decisions Kueue makes. We use
a local [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) cluster so that you can follow the
steps on your machine, but the same steps apply to any cluster whose nodes
carry topology labels.

The intended audience for this page are [batch administrators](/docs/tasks#batch-administrator).
If you are a batch user looking to run workloads on an already configured

> cluster, see [Run Workloads with Topology-Aware Scheduling](/docs/tasks/run/topology_aware_scheduling/).

Reviewer 2: Nit: I noticed that we are inconsistent with using hyphens, i.e. it's either "Topology Aware" or "Topology-Aware". I'd align, since in this PR the section title does not use the hyphen, but the links do.

Author: I decided to standardize all docs on hyphens as it seems more accurate and aligned with e.g. https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-aware-scheduling/

## Before you begin

Make sure the following conditions are met:

- The kubectl command-line tool is installed.
- The jq command-line JSON processor is installed.
- [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) is installed.
- The `TopologyAwareScheduling` feature gate is enabled (beta, on by default).

## Step 1: A cluster with topology labels

TAS relies on node labels that describe the placement of each node in the
physical hierarchy of your data center, for example its block, rack, and
hostname. On cloud providers these labels are typically set by the provider

> (see [Ecosystem Resources](/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling) for the label names); on-prem

Reviewer 2: Maybe this could link to https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling/#node-topology-information? I think this is the section where the label values are described.

But to be fair, this is only an example topology labeling scheme. This sentence is a little bit suggestive that this links to some more "real-world" label names (like "how GCP does this", "how AWS does this"). But maybe I'm misinterpreting.

Author: fixed

you have to label the nodes yourself.

For this guide, create a Kind cluster with 8 worker "nodes" spread over 2
blocks and 4 racks, simulated with labels:

{{< include "examples/tas/kind-cluster.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kind create cluster --config kind-cluster.yaml
```

Then [install Kueue](/docs/installation).

Verify the topology labels on the nodes:

```bash
kubectl get nodes -L cloud.provider.com/topology-block,cloud.provider.com/topology-rack
```

## Step 2: Create the Topology, ResourceFlavor and queues

The `Topology` object defines the hierarchy of the labels, from the widest
(block) to the narrowest (hostname). The `ResourceFlavor` references it via
`topologyName`, and selects the TAS nodes via `nodeLabels`:

{{< include "examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml" "yaml" >}}

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://kueue.sigs.k8s.io/examples/tas/sample-queues.yaml
```

> > **Note:** In `sample-queues.yaml`, the `nominalQuota` is intentionally set high (100 CPUs) so that ClusterQueue quota is not a limiting factor. This guarantees that scheduling rejections during topology experiments are driven strictly by Kueue's Topology Aware Scheduling (TAS) placement constraints rather than quota exhaustion.

Reviewer 2: The rest of the documentation uses the `alert` shortcode for notes like this. For example:
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/35ff311b705becfe25dc645bceece35949a0bc5a/site/content/en/docs/concepts/cluster_queue.md?plain=1#L79-L85

Unless you are going for something else here, I'd align this so we have consistent styling.

Author: fixed

This page shows how to set up
[Topology-Aware Scheduling (TAS)](/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling) as
a cluster administrator, and how to observe the decisions Kueue makes. We use
a local [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) cluster so that you can follow the
steps on your machine, but the same steps apply to any cluster whose nodes
carry topology labels.

The intended audience for this page are [batch administrators](/docs/tasks#batch-administrator).
If you are a batch user looking to run workloads on an already configured
cluster, see [Run Workloads with Topology-Aware Scheduling](/docs/tasks/run/topology_aware_scheduling/).

## Before you begin

Make sure the following conditions are met:

- The kubectl command-line tool is installed.
- The jq command-line JSON processor is installed.
- [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) is installed.
- The `TopologyAwareScheduling` feature gate is enabled (beta, on by default).

## Step 1: A cluster with topology labels

TAS relies on node labels that describe the placement of each node in the
physical hierarchy of your data center, for example its block, rack, and
hostname. On cloud providers these labels are typically set by the provider

> (for details and cloud-specific examples, see [Node topology information](/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling/#node-topology-information) and [Ecosystem Resources](/docs/ecosystem/)); on-premise,

Reviewer 2: I think you need to pull in the recent changes from main to your branch, because the CI pipeline is screaming that the `/docs/ecosystem` does not exist.

```bash
WORKLOAD=$(kubectl get workload -o name --sort-by='.metadata.creationTimestamp' | tail -n 1)
kubectl get $WORKLOAD -o jsonpath='{.status.admission.podSetAssignments[0].topologyAssignment}' | jq
```

The output confirms that Pods were packed into the remaining non-full nodes across multiple domains, for example:

```json
{
  "levels": [
    "kubernetes.io/hostname"
  ],
  "slices": [
    {
      "domainCount": 2,
      "podCounts": {
        "individual": [
          4,
          2
        ]
      },
      "valuesPerLevel": [
        {
          "individual": {
            "prefix": "kind-worker",
            "roots": [
              "2",
              "8"
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## Cleanup

```bash
kind delete cluster
```

## What's next

- Learn about all [PodSet annotations](/docs/tasks/run/topology_aware_scheduling/) available to batch users.
- Explore advanced features like Node Hotswap and failure recovery in [Topology-Aware Scheduling Concepts](/docs/concepts/topology_aware_scheduling).

> - Combine TAS with [MultiKueue](/docs/tasks/manage/setup_multikueue/#setup-with-topology-aware-scheduling-tas).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Combine TAS with [MultiKueue](/docs/tasks/manage/setup_multikueue/#create-a-sample-setup-with-tas).
```

I ran a quick scan with Gemini for any broken anchors because they are not reported in CI. This anchor was flagged and it indeed seems to be invalid.

Reviewer 2: I noticed this was not applied - I think this is still relevant.

Author: fixed
